Eve 0.1.1
=========

:date: 2013-10-31
:category: develop
:tags: releases

Although this is a maintenance release it introduces a few important
breaking changes to the API, so you may want to read the following notes
carefully.

New payload format
------------------
item-id wrappers have been completely removed from POST/PATCH/PUT requests and
responses. Requests for single document inserts  are now performed by just
submitting the relevant document. 

.. code-block:: python

    POST /users
    { "email": "jobs@apple.com", "password": "iRock"}

Response payload:

.. code-block:: python

    {
        "status": "OK", 
        "updated": "Sat, 05 Oct 2013 09:27:08 GMT", 
        "_id": "524fdb6c38345b5d308c3a10", 
        ...
    }
  
Bulk insert are now performed by submitting a list of documents. 

.. code-block:: python

    POST /users
    [
        {"email": "jobs@apple.com", "password": "iRock"}, 
        {"email": "orders@apple.com", "password": "iSuck"}
    ]
  
The response to bulk requests is a list itself, in which every item contains
the state of the corresponding document within the request. 

.. code-block:: python

    [
        {
            "status": "OK", 
            "updated": "Sat, 05 Oct 2013 09:27:08 GMT", 
            "_id": "524fdb6c38345b5d308c3a10", 
            ...
        }, 
        {
            "status": "ERR", 
            "issues": ["email not unique"]
        }
    ]
  
PUT and PATCH are also simplified and don't require id wrappers anymore.
Overall this change simplifies the payloads making them easier to handle,
especially for popular Javascript frameworks such as AngularJS.

Please note that this is a breaking change. Also be aware that when the request
content-type is ``x-www-form-urlencoded``, single document insert is performed.

Other important changes
-----------------------
- In order to avoid confusion between the Eve schema and the underlying MongoDB
  collections, ``collection`` (used when setting up a data relation, see
  `Embedded Resource Serialization`_) has been renamed to ``resource``. Also,
  embedded resource serialization is now active on item endpoints as well
  (previously it would only work on resource endpoints).
- For better consistency with the ``auth_field`` setting, ``auth.user_id``
  renamed to ``auth.request_auth_value``.
- Endpoints with deep paths like ``/contacts/overseas`` can now function in
  conjuction with top-level endpoints (``/contacts``).  Endpoints are
  completely independent: each can allow item lookups (``/contacts/<id>`` and
  ``contacts/overseas/<id>``) and different access methods. Previously, while
  you could have complex urls, you could not get nested endpoints to work
  properly.

Wrapping it up
--------------
The documentation_ has been updated to reflect all the changes. Remember to
check the changelog_ for details and know about the other updates.

As always, thanks to all the people who contributed to this update: Xavi
Cubillas, Ryan Shea, Ronan Delacorix, Petr Jašek, Roy Smith.  Also thanks to
all the people who suggested features and fixes.

Get `Eve 0.1.1`_.

.. _changelog: http://python-eve.org/changelog.html
.. _documentation: http://python-eve.org
.. _`Eve 0.1.1`: https://crate.io/packages/Eve/
.. _`Embedded Resource Serialization`: http://python-eve.org/features.html#embedded-resource-serialization

