Eve 0.2 released
================

:date: 2013-12-02
:category: develop
:tags: releases

This release marks the introduction of several new features along with a few
changes and fixes.

- Sub-Resources_!
- Unique identifier fields can now be of arbitrary types, not only ObjectIds.
  See the brand new `Custom IDs Tutorial`_.
- It is now possible to completely disable support for the ``If-Match`` header (use
  at your own risk). 
- New ``pre_<method>`` event hooks are available. They are raised when a request
  is received and before it is processed. See the updated `Event Hooks`_ section.
- Lots of new customization options. See Configuration_.
- Default `embedded documents`_ can now be defined at any endpoint.
- Default sorting can be defined at any resource endpoint.
- Settings can be also passed as a python dictionary.
- Custom JSON encoders can now be used with the framework.

As always, see the changelog_ for details on all updates.

Thanks to the ever growing Eve community and especially to the contributors
who helped with this patch: Petr Jašek, Kelvin Hammond, dccrazyboy, Christoph
Witzany, Stanislav Heller, Florian Rathberger.

Get `Eve 0.2`_ while it's hot.

.. _changelog: http://python-eve.org/changelog.html
.. _documentation: http://python-eve.org
.. _`Eve 0.2`: https://crate.io/packages/Eve/
.. _`Configuration`: http://python-eve.org/config.html
.. _`Sub-Resources`: http://python-eve.org/features.html#subresources
.. _`Custom IDs Tutorial`: http://python-eve.org/tutorials/custom_idfields.html
.. _`Event Hooks`: http://python-eve.org/features.html#event-hooks
.. _`Embedded documents`: http://python-eve.org/features.html#embedded-resource-serialization

