Eve 0.3 Released
================

:date: 2014-14-02
:category: develop
:tags: releases

As with every new release there are a lot of new things coming with 0.3. 

- **File Storage**. Images, pdf, etc. can now be uploaded as ``media``
  fields. Upload is done via POST, PUT and PATCH as usual, but using the
  ``multipart/data-form`` content-type. Files are returned as Base64 encoded
  strings. For optmized performance files are stored in GridFS by default.
  Custom ``MediaStorage`` classes can be implemented and passed to the
  application to support alternative storage systems. See `File Storage`_.
- **Validation Format**. Validation errors are now reported as a dictionary
  where offending fields are keys and issues are values. This should allow
  for easier parsing of validation errors easier. See my rambling_ on the
  mailing list if you want to know more about the reasons behind this breaking
  change.
- **Improved metatags consistency**. Standard API tags have been renamed across
  the board so they are all consistent and easily recognisable (now they all
  start with an underscore: ``_etag``, ``_status``, ``_issues``, etc.) Find the complete
  list on the Configuration_ page.
- **XML/JSON opt-outs**. You can easily disable either JSON or XML support if so
  you wish.
- **Enhanced projections**. Field exclusion (``?projection={"fieldname": 0}``)
  now supported in client projections. 
- **Number data type**. The ``number`` data type allows you to
  define a field which accepts both integers and floats.
- **and more**. Just check the changelog_.

Special thanks to Josh Villbrandt, Jaroslav Semančík, John Deng, David
Buchmann, Hannes Tiede who contributed to this update.

As always, get `Eve 0.3`_ while it's hot.

.. _changelog: http://python-eve.org/changelog.html
.. _documentation: http://python-eve.org
.. _`Eve 0.3`: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Eve
.. _`Configuration`: http://python-eve.org/config.html
.. _`File Storage`: http://python-eve.org/features.html#file-storage
.. _rambling: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/python-eve/E0A6YYq_h2c
