Eve 0.5 Released 
================

:date: 2015-01-12
:category: develop
:tags: releases

Today Eve 0.5 has been released. It brings a lot of new features and fixes,
along with a couple breaking changes. I'll let you see che changelog_ for
a complete list, but let's see a few important updates.

Operatins Log
-------------
The OpLog is an API-wide log of all edit operations. Every ``POST``, ``PATCH``
``PUT`` and ``DELETE`` operation can be recorded to the oplog. At its core the
oplog is simply a server log. What makes it a little bit different is that it
can be exposed as a read-only endpoint, thus allowing clients to query it as
they would with any other API endpoint. For more see `Operations Log`_.

GeoJSON
-------
The MongoDB data layer supports geographic data structures encoded in GeoJSON
format. All GeoJSON objects supported by MongoDB are available. See GeoJSON_

Internal Resources
------------------
By default responses to GET requests to the home endpoint will include all the
resources. The ``internal_resource`` setting keyword, however, allows you to make
an endpoint internal, available only for internal data manipulation: no HTTP
calls can be made against it and it will be excluded from the HATEOAS links.
See `Internal Resources`_.

Internal CRUD methods
---------------------
``post_internal``, ``put_internal``, ``patch_internal``, ``delete_internal``
can be used for internal CRUD calls. These methods are not rate limited,
authentication is not checked and pre-request events are not raised. Validation
can optionally be skipped. All internal methods still properly update API meta
fields such as ``ETag``, ``_updated``, etc.


Other relevant changes
-----------------------

- Support for sub-document projections.
- Embedding of documents by references located in any subdocuments. 
- Comma delimited sort syntax in queries. The MongoDB data layer now also supports queries like ``?sort=lastname,-age``.
- ETags are now persisted with the documents. This ensures that etags are consistent across queries, even when projection queries are issued.
- Support for multiple origins when using CORS;
- Support for CORS ``Access-Control-Expose-Headers``.
- ``JSON_SORT_KEYS`` enables JSON key sorting.
- Regexes are stripped out of HATEOAS urls when present. You now get ``games/<game_id>/images`` where previously you would get ``games/<regex('[a-f0-9]{24}'):game_id>/images``
- ``DELETE`` returns ``204 NoContent`` on a successful delete.
- ``If-Modified-Since`` has been disabled on resource (collections) endpoints. Same functionality is available with a ``?where={"_udpated": {"$gt": "<RFC1123 date>"}}`` request. The OpLog also allows retrieving detailed changes happened at any endpoint, deleted documents included.

And *a lot* more, see the huge changelog_.

Contributors
------------
This patch Hall of Fame is impressively long, once again showing what a strong
and nice community is gathering around the Eve project, something I am really
proud of.

Arnau Orriols, Ashley Roach, Christian Henke, Christopher Larsen, Daniel
Lytkin, Dmitry Anoshin, Gino Zhang, Grisha K., Harro van der Klauw, James
Stewart, Jaroslav Semančík, Jen Montes, Johan Bloemberg, Jorge Morales, Josh
Villbrandt, Juan Madurga, Kevin Funk, Kurt Doherty, Magdas Adrian, Marcus
Cobden, Matt Creenan, Mikael Berg, Niall Donegan, Olivier Poitrey, Or Neeman,
Petr Jašek, Sebastián Magrí, Stanislav Heller, hansotronic

Thank you all for making this release possibile!

Get `Eve 0.5`_ while it's hot!

.. _`Operations log`: http://python-eve.org/features#operations-log
.. _GeoJSON: http://python-eve.org/features.html#geojson
.. _`Internal Resources`: http://python-eve.org/features#internal-resources
.. _changelog: http://python-eve.org/changelog.html
.. _documentation: http://python-eve.org
.. _`Eve 0.5`: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Eve
