Eve 0.6 Released 
================

:date: 2015-09-28
:category: develop
:tags: releases, python

I'm very excited to announce today's release of Eve 0.6. Lots new features and
fixes along with a couple breaking changes. Speaking of new features and
improvements, some highlights include:

- Support for multiple databases. Each API endpoint can optionally serve from
  a different MongoDB instance. See the new ``mongo_prefix`` setting.

- Authentication-driven_ database access, also known as user-reserved databases. 

- Index maintenance. On MongoDB, indexes can be created/updated at application
  startup. See  the new ``mongo_indexes`` keyword.

- Upserts on PUT. Allows document creation on PUT if the document does not
  exists. Enabled by default, can be switched off. See the new
  ``UPSERT_ON_PUT`` setting.

- `Soft Deletes`_, you asked for it.

- ``JSONP`` support. ``CORS`` gets support for ``X-ALLOW-CREDENTIALS`` too.

- `Serving media files at dedicated endpoint`_  as an alternative to returning
  them as Base64 strings.

- `Enhanced Logging`_.

- A whole set of new, powerful validation rules such as ``anyof``, ``allof``,
  ``noneof``, ``oneof``, ``coerce``.

- Support for dot notation in POST, PATCH and PUT methods. Be aware that,
  for PATCH and PUT, if dot notation is used even on just one field, the whole
  sub-document will be replaced. So if this document is stored:
  
  ``{"name": "john", "location": {"city": "New York", "address": "address"}}``
  
  A PATCH like this:

    ``{"location.city": "Boston"}``

  (which is exactly equivalent to:)

    ``{"location": {"city": "a nested city"}}``

  Will update the document to:
  
  ``{"name": "john", "location": {"city": "Boston"}}``

Again these are just some highlights but there is a lot more to discover. How
about ``X-Total-Count`` header for collection GET/HEAD requests, or
``etag_ignore_field`` for ignoring certain fields when computing eTags? Make
sure you read the whole changelog_!

Breaking changes
----------------

- When HATEOAS is off the home endpoint will respond with ``200 OK``
  instead of ``404 Not Found`` (also see the new ``INFO`` setting which allows
  exposing of API name and version at the home endpoint). 

- PUT does not return ``404`` if a document URL does not exist. It will
  attempt to create the document instead. Set ``UPSET_ON_PUT`` to ``False`` to
  disable this behaviour and get a ``404`` instead.

- A PATCH including an ``ID_FIELD`` field which value is different than the
  original will get a ``400 Bad Request``, along with an explanation in the
  message body that the field is immutable. Previously, it would get an
  ``unknown field`` validation error.

There is also a truckload of closed tickets, fixed and improvements so again,
make sure to check the changelog_.

Contributors
------------
Cyprien Pannier, Daniel Lytkin, David Wood, Dominik Kellner, Gonéri Le Bouder,
Henrique Barroso, Joakim Uddholm, Julian Hille, Kevin Roy, Magdas Adrian,
Matthew Ellison, Matthieu Prat, Mayur Dhamanwala, Nick Park, Olivier Carrère, 
Olivier Poitrey, Pau Freixes, Petr Jašek, Samuli Tuomola, Sebastien Estienne,
Stratos Gerakakis, Tobias Betz, xgddsg.

What a team. Thank you all for making this release possibile!

Get `Eve 0.6`_ while it's hot!

.. _changelog: http://python-eve.org/changelog.html
.. _documentation: http://python-eve.org
.. _`Eve 0.6`: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Eve
.. _Configuration: http://python-eve.org/config
.. _Authentication-driven: http://python-eve.org/authentication.html#authdrivendb
.. _`Enhanced Logging`: http://python-eve.org/features#enhanced-logging
.. _`Soft Deletes`: http://python-eve.org/features#soft-delete
.. _`Serving media files at dedicated endpoint`: http://python-eve.org/features#serving-media-files-at-a-dedicated-endpoint
