Eve 0.7 Released 
================

:date: 2017-02-06
:category: develop
:tags: releases, python

A new major release of the `Eve REST API Framework`_ is finally out_ with a number
of cool new features, a few fixes and a couple of possibly breaking changes.
This post explains v0.7 new features and changes compared to the previous
versions, providing relevant links when necessary. See the changelog_ for
details about fixes and documentation updates also coming with this release.

Major additions
---------------
- Mongo Aggregation Framework Support. API endpoints can now respond with database
  aggregation results. Aggregation pipelines can be static or dynamic. When
  they are dynamic the client uses the new ``aggregate`` parameter to influence
  the query results, like this: ``?aggregate={"$value": 2}``. For more
  informations see `MongoDB Aggregation Framework`_.

- Option to improve pagination performance. Set
  ``OPTIMIZE_PAGINATION_FOR_SPEED`` to ``True`` to get a very nice boost on
  ``GET`` responses. When optimization is active no count operation (which can
  be slow on large collections) is performed on the database. This does have
  a few consequences. Firstly, no document count is returned. Secondly, HATEOAS
  is less accurate: no last page link is available, and next page link is
  always included, even on last page. On big collections, switching this
  feature on can greatly improve performance. Defaults to ``False`` (slower
  performance; document count included; accurate HATEOAS)

- Support for new ``Location`` header (`RFC 7231 § 6.3.2`_). Location header is
  returned on ``201 Created`` POST responses. If will contain the URI to the
  created document. If bulk inserts are enabled, only the first document URI is
  returned. This is especially useful in scenarios where HATEOAS is disabled.

- Support for pretty printing. Clients can request json responses to be pretty
  printed (indented) by adding the new ``pretty`` parameter to their query. See
  `Pretty Printing`_.

- ETag match checks can be made optional. If the new ``ENFORCE_IF_MATCH``
  option is active, then all requests are expected to include the ``If-Match``
  or they will be rejected (same as old behavior). However, if
  ``ENFORCE_IF_MATCH`` is disabled, then client determines whether request is
  conditional. When ``If-Match`` is included, then request is conditional,
  otherwise the request is processed with no conditional checks. See `Disabling
  Concurrency Control`_.

Minor additions
---------------
- Regexes are allowed by setting ``X_DOMAINS_RE`` values. This allows CORS to
  support websites with dynamic ranges of subdomains.

- Support weak ETags, commonly applied by servers transmitting gzipped content.

- Allow old document versions to be cache validated using ETags.

- ``get_internal`` and ``getitem_internal`` functions can be used for internal
  GET calls. These methods are not rate limited, authentication is not checked
  and pre-request events are not raised.

- Flask views (``@app.route``) can now set ``mongo_prefix`` via Flask’s ``g``
  object, like in ``g.mongo_prefix = 'MONGO2'``.

- Support for MongoDB ``DBRef`` fields.

- ``MONGO_OPTIONS`` allows MongoDB arguments to be passed to the MongoClient
  object. Defaults to ``{}``.

- Flask-PyMongo compatibility for ``MONGO_CONNECT`` config setting.

- ``AUTO_COLLAPSE_MULTI_KEYS.`` If set to ``True``, multiple values sent with
  the same key, submitted using the ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` or
  ``multipart/form-data`` content types, will automatically be converted to
  a list of values. When using this together with ``AUTO_CREATE_LISTS`` it
  becomes possible to use lists of media fields. Defaults to ``False``.

- ``AUTO_CREATE_LISTS``. When submitting a non list type value for a field with
  type list, automatically create a one element list before running the
  validators. Defaults to ``False``.

- ``MULTIPART_FORM_FIELDS_AS_JSON``. In case you are submitting your resource
  as ``multipart/form-data`` all form data fields will be submitted as strings,
  breaking any validation rules you might have on the resource fields. If you
  want to treat all submitted form data as JSON strings you will have to
  activate this setting.

- Query parameters not recognised by Eve are now returned in HATEOAS URLs.

- ``on_oplog_push`` event is fired when OPLOG is about to be updated. Callbacks
  receive two arguments: resource (resource name) and entries (list of oplog
  entries which are about to be written). See OPLOG_.

- OPLOG audit now include the username or token when available.

- ``OPLOG_CHANGE_METHODS`` is a list of HTTP methods which operations will
  include changes into the OPLOG. See OPLOG_.

- Support for Python 3.6 and 3.5

Breaking changes
----------------
- ``428 Precondition Required`` is now returned when the ``If-Match`` request
  header is missing. Previously, a generic ``403 Forbidden`` was returned.

- ETag response header now conforms to `RFC 7232 § 2.3`_, and is surrounded by
  double quotes

Hall of Fame
------------
As usual, a number of contributors participated in the effort: Arnau Orriols,
Arthur Burkart, Carles Bruguera, Conrad Burchert, Eugene Prikazchikov, George
Lestaris, Giorgos Margaritis, Gustavo Vargas, Hasan Pekdemir, Kris Lambrechts,
Mario Kralj, Massimo Scamarcia, Mateusz Łoskot, Mattias Lundberg, Nick Park,
NotSpecial, Rodrigo Rodriguez, Roman Gavrilov, Stanislav Filin, Stratos
Gerakakis, mmizotin.

It is always heartening to see and appreciate how many people are helping in
taking the framework to the next level. Thank you all!

.. _`MongoDB Aggregation Framework`: http://python-eve.org/features.html#mongodb-aggregation-framework
.. _`RFC 7231 § 6.3.2`: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.3.2
.. _`Pretty Printing`: http://python-eve.org/features.html#pretty-printing
.. _`Disabling Concurrency Control`: http://python-eve.org/features.html#disabling-concurrency-control
.. _OPLOG: http://python-eve.org/features.html#operations-log
.. _`RFC 7232 § 2.3`: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7232#section-2.3
.. _`Eve REST API Framework`: http://python-eve.org
.. _changelog: http://python-eve.org/changelog.html
.. _out: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Eve
